The President:
Hi, everybody.
Four years ago this month, a
crisis that started out on Wall
Street almost brought
down our entire economy.
The nation's biggest banks
were days away from failing.
The stock market -- and millions
of American retirement accounts
-- were in free-fall.
Credit froze.
Lending stopped.
And businesses large and small
didn't even know if they'd be
able to make payroll.
It was a moment the likes
of which few Americans had
seen before.
Today, we know the biggest cause
of that crisis was reckless
behavior in the housing market.
Millions of Americans who did
the right and responsible thing
-- who shopped for a home,
secured a mortgage they could
afford, and made their
payments on time --
were badly hurt by the
irresponsible actions of others.
By lenders who sold loans to
families who couldn't afford
them -- and buyers who knew
they couldn't afford them.
By speculators who were looking
just to make a quick buck.
And by banks that packaged and
sold those risky mortgages for
phony profits.
When the party stopped, and
the housing bubble burst,
it pushed our entire economy
into a historic recession --
and left middle-class
families holding the bag.
Four years later, the
housing market is healing.
Home sales and
construction are up.
Prices are beginning to rise.
And more than a million families
who began this year owing more
on their mortgages than
their homes are worth,
are now back above water.
So we're moving in
the right direction.
But we're not there yet.
There are still millions of
Americans who are struggling
with their mortgages, even at a
time of historically low rates.
Now, I know there are some who
think that the only option for
homeowners is to just stand by
and hope that the market has
hit bottom.
I don't agree with that.
That's why my Administration
teamed up with state attorneys
general to investigate the
terrible way many homeowners
were treated, and secured a
settlement from the nation's
biggest banks -- banks that were
bailed out with taxpayer dollars
-- to help families
stay in their homes.
And that's why we announced
new steps to help responsible
homeowners refinance
their mortgages.
Already, hundreds of thousands
of Americans who were stuck in
high-interest rate loans have
been able to take advantage of
lower rates and save thousands
of dollars every year.
That's not only good
for those families;
it's also good for our economy.
When folks are spending
less on mortgage payments,
they're spending more
at local businesses.
And when those businesses
have more customers,
they start hiring more workers.
But we can do even more
if Congress is willing to
do their part.
Back in February, I sent
Congress a plan to give every
responsible homeowner the chance
to save about $3,000 a year on
their mortgages by
refinancing at lower rates.
It's a plan that has the
support of independent,
nonpartisan economists
and leaders across the
housing industry.
But Republicans in Congress
worked to keep it from even
getting to a vote.
And here we are --
seven months later --
still waiting on
Congress to act.
This makes no sense.
Last week, mortgage rates
were at historic lows.
But instead of helping more and
more hardworking families take
advantage of those rates,
Congress was away on break.
Instead of worrying about you,
they'd already gone home to
worry about their campaigns.
The truth is, it's going to take
a while for our housing market
to fully recover.
But it's going to take
a lot more time --
and cause a lot more hurt --
if Congress keeps standing
in the way.
If you agree with me, I hope
you'll make your voices heard.
Call your Representative.
Send them an email.
Show up at their town hall and
tell them that when Congress
comes back to Washington, they
better come back ready to work.
All of you are doing
everything you can to meet
your responsibilities.
I think it's time
Congress did the same.
Thanks and have a great weekend.